---
layout: post 
title:  "Что такое Музыка?"
---

[< Назад]({% post_url 2025-01-07-what-who-where-when-why %}) 



## BIOLOGICAL, NOT MYSTICAL

Music has played a central role in human existence for hundreds of thousands of years.

So...what is music? According to the evidence, it's probably an adaptation-although some researchers argue music is a byproduct of other adaptations.

What's an adaptation? It's a biological trait that evolved to promote survival or reproductive success. A tiger's fangs. A peacock's fan. A mosquito's ability to draw blood and escape into the night, just as you're trying to get to sleep.

As a human, you possess many formidable adaptations, such as bipedalism (twolegged walking), language, and a lot of other inborn skills that your fellow primates do not have. (Unlike horses, all primates - several hundred species-have highly flexible 5 -fingered hands, opposable digits, and sharp eyesight. Some, such as monkeys, apes, and humans, also have relatively large brains.)

Before biologists confer "adaptation" status upon a human trait, in a solemn ceremony at Stonehenge under a full moon, said trait must fulfil several criteria, among them:

- Humans in all present-day cultures must use the adaptation.
    
- Evidence from history and anthropology must indicate the adaptation's existence in ancient cultures.
    
- Evidence from palaeontology must indicate the adaptation's existence to some degree in extinct hominid species-that is, in other species of bipedal human-like primates, all now extinct.
    

All of the above apply to language and bipedalism. They also apply to music. Every human culture ever known has had music. Even societies that do not have well-developed visual arts show sophisticated musical development.

Today, practically all normal adult human beings:

- Can and do sing to some degree (Pop Idol/American Idol contestants notwithstanding), even if only in the privacy of an elevator or on the back of a horse in the hills south of Tulsa.
- Can and do tap at least one foot to a tune, once in a while (an important qualification as you'll see in a minute).
- Listen to self-chosen music, purchase music, and otherwise show appreciation for music at some level. ("I could've played guitar like Jimi, but I chose to go into accounting instead, to meet more women.")



[Далее > ]({% post_url 2025-01-09-who %})